---
title: Essay 3
subtitle: Subtitle here
weight: 42
type: essay
contributor:
  - first_name:  Emily Beck and Nicole La Bouff
    last_name:
    bio: "uhbouby uuyyu uyyg"
---

{{< q-map lat="48.8566" long="2.3522" geojson="/data/sample-geojson.json" >}}

French art consists of the visual and plastic arts (including architecture,
woodwork, textiles, and ceramics) originating from the geographical area of
France. Modern France was the main centre for the European art of the Upper
Paleolithic, then left many megalithic monuments, and in the Iron Age many of
the most impressive finds of early Celtic art. The Gallo-Roman period left a
distinctive provincial style of sculpture, and the region around the modern
Franco-German border led the empire in the mass production of finely
decoratedAncient Roman pottery, which was exported to Italy and elsewhere on a
lagre scale. With Merovingian art the story of French styles as a distinct and
influential element in the wider development of the art of Christian Europe
begins. ({{< q-cite "Faure 1909" "54" >}})

France can fairly be said to have been a leader in the development of Romanesque
art and Gothic art, before the Italian Renaissance led to Italy replacing France
as the main source of stylistic developments until the age of Louis XIV, when
France largely regained this role, holding it until the mid-20th century.

## Contents ##

- Early Modern Period
  - Baroque and Classicism
  - Rococo and Neoclassicism
- Modern Period
  - 19th Century
  - 20th Century

## Early Modern Period ##

In the late fifteenth century, the French invasion of Italy and the proximity of
the vibrant Burgundy court, with its Flemish connections, brought the French
into contact with the goods, paintings, and the creative spirit of the Northern
and Italian Renaissance. Initial artistic changes at that time in France were
executed by Italian and Flemish artists, such as Jean Clouet and his son
François Clouet, along with the Italians, Rosso Fiorentino, Francesco
Primaticcio, and Niccolò dell'Abbate of what is often called the first School of
Fontainebleau from 1531. Leonardo da Vinci also was invited to France by
François I, but other than the paintings which he brought with him, he produced
little for the French king. ({{< q-cite "Rosenblum 1967" "103" >}})

### Baroque and Classicism ##

{{< q-deepzoom image="http://evil-manifests.davidnewbury.com/iiif/images/garden-1/info.json" >}}

The seventeenth century marked a golden age for French art in all fields. In the
early part of the seventeenth century, late mannerist and early Baroque
tendencies continued to flourish in the court of Marie de Medici and Louis XIII.
Art from this period shows influences from both the north of Europe, namely the
Dutch and Flemish schools, and from Roman painters of the Counter-Reformation.
Artists in France frequently debated the contrasting merits of Peter Paul Rubens
with his the Flemish baroque, voluptuous lines and colors to Nicolas Poussin
with his rational control, proportion, Roman classicism. Another proponent of
classicism working in Rome was Claude Gellée, known as Le Lorrain, who defined
the form of classical landscape.

{{< q-figure src="two-martinis.jpg"  caption="A small pic of two martinis stolen from the web."  class="is-pulled-right">}}

From the mid to late seventeenth century, French art is more often referred to
by the term "Classicism" which implies an adherence to certain rules of
proportion and sobriety uncharacteristic of the Baroque, as it was practiced in
southern and eastern Europe during the same period. Under Louis XIV, the Baroque
as it was practiced in Italy, was not in French taste, for instance, as
Bernini's famous proposal for redesigning the Louvre was rejected by Louis XIV.
Georges de La Tour, The Penitent Magdalene, c. 1640.
({{< q-cite "Berson 1996" "233" >}})

{{< q-figure-group id="1.6, 1.7" grid="2" caption="This group caption supercedes individual captions." >}}

For sculpture Louis XIV's reign also proved an important moment thanks to the
King's protection of artists like Pierre Puget, François Girardon and
Charles-Antoine Coysevox. In Rome, Pierre Legros, working in a more baroque
manner, was one of the most influential sculptors of the end of the century.

### Rococo and Neoclassicism ###

Paintings from the period show an
emphasis more on color than drawing, with apparent brush strokes and very
colorful scenes. Important painters from this period include Antoine Watteau,
considered the inventor of thefête galante, Nicolas Lancret and François
Boucher.

{{< q-figure id="1.8" class="is-pulled-right" >}}

The Louis XV style of decoration, although already apparent at the end of the
last reign, was lighter with pastel colors, wood panels, smaller rooms, less
gilding, and fewer brocades; shells, garlands, and occasional Chinese subjects
predominated. The Chantilly, Vincennes and then Sèvres manufactures produced
some of the finest porcelain of the time. The highly skilled ébénistes,
cabinet-makers mostly based in Paris, created elaborate pieces of furniture with
precious wood and bronze ornaments that were to be highly praised and imitated
in all of Europe. The most famous are Jean-François Oeben, who created the work
desk of king Louis XV in Versailles, and Bernard II van Risamburgh. Rooms in
châteaux and hôtels particuliers were more intimate than during the reign of
Louis XIV and were decorated with rocaille style boiseries (carved wood pannels
covering the walls of a room) conceived by architects like Germain Boffrand or
ornemanistes (designers of decorative objects) likeJuste-Aurèle Meissonnier.

{{< q-figure id="1.10" class="is-pulled-left" >}}

Architects like Ledoux and Boullée developed a radical style of neoclassical
architecture based on simple and pure geometrical forms with a research of
simetry and harmony, elaborating visionary projects like the complex of the
Saltworks of Arc-et-Senans by Ledoux, a model of an ideal factory developed from
the rational concepts of theEnlightmentthinkers.

## Modern Period ##

### 19th Century ###

The French Revolution and the Napoleonic wars brought great changes to the arts
in France. The program of exaltation and myth making attendant to the Emperor
Napoleon I of France was closely coordinated in the paintings of David, Gros and
Guérin. Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingreswas the main figure of neoclassicism until
the 1850s and a prominent teacher, giving priority to drawing over color.
Meanwhile, Orientalism, Egyptian motifs, the tragic anti-hero, the wild
landscape, the historical novel, and scenes from the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance —all these eleme

{{< q-figure id="1.11" >}}

Romantic tendencies continued throughout the century, both idealized landscape
painting and Naturalism have their seeds in Romanticism. The work of Gustave

### 20th Century ###

The early years of the twentieth century were dominated by experiments in colour
and content that Impressionism and Post-Impressionism had unleashed. The
products of the far east also brought new influences. At roughly the same time,
Les Fauves (Henri Matisse, André Derain, Maurice de Vlaminck, Albert Marquet,
Raoul Dufy, Othon Friesz, Charles Camoin, Henri Manguin) exploded into color,
much like German Expressionism. ({{< q-cite "Broude 1991" >}})

{{< q-figure id="1.14" >}}
